In a certain Russian ministerial department
But it is perhaps better that I do not mention 
which department it was. There are in the 
whole of Eussia no persons more sensitive than 
Government officials. Each of them believes if 
he is annoyed in any way, that the whole official 
class is insulted in his person. 
Eecently an Isprawnik (country magistrate) — 
I do not know of which town — is said to have 
drawn up a report with the object of showing 
that, ignoring Government orders, people were 
speaking of Isprawniks in terms of contempt. In 
order to prove his assertions, he forwarded with 
his report a bulky work of fiction, in which on 
about every tenth page an Isprawnik appeared 
generally in a drunken condition. 
In order therefore to avoid any unpleasant- 
ness, I will not definitely indicate the depart- 
ment in which the scene of my story is laid, and 
will rather say " in a certain chancellery." 
Well, in a certain chancellery there was a 
certain man who, as I cannot deny, was not of 
an attractive appearance. He was short, had a 

face marke'd with smallpox, was rather bald in 
front, and his forehead and cheeks were deeply 
lined with furrows — to say nothing of other 
physical imperfections. Such was the outer 
aspect of our hero, as produced by the St Peters- 
burg climate. 
As regards his official rank — for with us 
Russians the official rank must always be given — 
he was what is usually known as a permanent 
titular councillor, one of those unfortunate beings 
who, as is well known, are made a butt of by 
various authors who have the Had habit of 
attacking people who cannot defend themselves. 

Our hero's family name was Bashmatchkin ; 
his baptismal name Akaki Akakievitch. Per- 
haps the reader may think this name somewhat 
strange and far-fetched, but he can be assured 
that it is not so, and that circumstances so 
arranged it that it was quite impossible to give 
him any other name. 

This happened in the following way. Akaki 
Akakievitch was born, if I am not mistaken, on 
the night of the 23rd of March. His deceased 
mother, the wife of an official and a very good 
woman, immediately made proper arrange- 
ments for his baptism. When the time came, 
she was lying on the bed before the door. At 
her right hand stood the godfather, Ivan Ivano- 
vitch Jeroshkin, a very important person, who 
was registrar of the senate ; at her left, the god- 

mother Anna Semenovna Byelobrushkova, the 
wife of a police inspector, a woman of rare 
virtues. 

Three names were suggested to the mother 
from which to choose one for the child — 
Mokuja, Sossuja, or Khozdazat. 

" No," she said, " I don't like such names." 

In order to meet her wishes, the church calen- 
dar was opened in another place, and the names 
Triphiliy, Dula, and Varakhasiy were found. 

' ' This is a punishment from heaven, ' said the 
mother. "What sort of names are these! I 
never heard the like ! If it had been Varadat 
or Varukh, but Triphiliy and Varakhasiy ! ' ' 

They looked again in the calendar and found 
Pavsikakhiy and Vakhtisiy. 

"Now I see," said the mother, "this is 
plainly fate. If there is no help for it, then he 
had better take his father's name, which was 
Akaki." 

So the child was called Akaki Akakievitch. 
It was baptised, although it wept and cried and 
made all kinds of grimaces, as though it had a 
presentiment that it would one day be a titular 
councillor. 

We have related all this so conscientiously that 
the reader himself might be convinced that it 
was impossible for the little Akaki to receive any 
other name. When and how he entered the 
chancellery and who appointed him, no one 

could remember. However many of his superiors 
might come and go, he was always seen in the 
same spot, in the same attitude, busy with the 
same work, and bearing the same title; so that 
people began to believe he had come into the 
world just as he was, with his bald forehead and 
official uniform. 

In the chancellery where he worked, no kind 
of notice was taken of him. Even the office 
attendants did not rise from their seats when he 
entered, nor look at him; they took no more 
notice than if a fly had flown through the room. 
His superiors treated him in a coldly despotic 
manner. The assistant of the head of the 
department, when he pushed a pile of papers 
under his nose, did not even say " Please copy 
those," or " There is something interesting for 
you," or make any other polite remark such as 
well-educated officials are in the habit of doing. 
But Akaki took the documents, without worrying 
himself whether they had the right to hand them 
over to him or not, and straightway set to work 
to copy them. 

His young colleagues made him the butt of 
their ridicule and their elegant wit, so far as 
officials can be said to possess any wit. They 
did not scruple to relate in his presence various 
tales of their own invention regarding his manner 
of life and his landlady, who was seventy years 
old. They declared that she beat him, and 


inquired of him when he would lead her to the 
marriage altar. Sometimes they let a shower 
of scraps of paper fall on his head, and told him 
they were snowflakes. 

But Akaki Akakievitch made no answer to 
all these attacks; he seemed oblivious of their 
presence. His work was not affected in the 
slightest degree; during all these interruptions 
he did not make a single error in copying. Only 
when the horse-play grew intolerable, when he 
was held by the arm and prevented writing, he 
would say ' ' Do leave me alone ! Why do you 
always want to disturb me at work ? ' ' There 
was something peculiarly pathetic in these words 
and the way in which he uttered them. 

One day it happened that when a young clerk, 
who had been recently appointed to the chan- 
cellery, prompted by the example of the others, 
was playing him some trick, he suddenly seemed 
arrested by something in the tone of Akaki' s 
voice, and from that moment regarded the old 
official with quite different eyes. He felt as though 
some supernatural power drew him away from 
the colleagues whose acquaintance he had made 
here, and whom he had hitherto regarded as 
well-educated, respectable men, and alienated 
him from them. Long afterwards, when sur- 
rounded by gay companions, he would see the 
figure of the poor little councillor and hear the 
words ' ' Do leave me alone ! Why will you 


always disturb me at work ? ' ' Along with these 
.words, he also heard others : ' ' Am I not your 
brother? " On such occasions the young man 
would hide his face in his hands, and think how 
little humane feeling after all was to be found in 
men's hearts; how much coarseness and cruelty 
was to be found even in the educated and those 
who were everywhere regarded as good and 
honourable men. 

Never was there an official who did his 
work so zealously as Akaki Akakievitch. " Zeal- 
ously," do I say? He worked with a passionate 
love of his task. While he copied official docu- 
ments, a world of varied beauty rose before 
his eyes. His delight in copying was legible in 
his face. To form certain letters afforded him 
special satisfaction, and when he came to them 
he was quite another man; he began to smile, 
his eyes sparkled, and he pursed up his lips, so 
that those who knew him could see by his face 
which letters he was working at. 

Had he been rewarded according to his zeal, 
he would perhaps — to his own astonishment — 
have been raised to the rank of civic councillor. 
However, he was not destined, as his colleagues 
expressed it, to wear a cross at his buttonhole, 
but only to get haemorrhoids by leading a too 
sedentary life. 

For the rest, I must mention that on one 
occasion he attracted a certain amount of atten- 


tion. A director, who was a kindly man and 
wished to reward him for his long service, 
ordered that he should be entrusted with a task 
more important than the documents which he 
usually had to copy. This consisted in prepar- 
ing a report for a court, altering the headings of 
various documents, and here and there changing 
the first personal pronoun into the third. 

Akaki undertook the work; but it confused 
and exhausted him to such a degree that the 
sweat ran from his forehead and he at last 
exclaimed : " No ! Please give me again some- 
thing to copy." From that time he was allowed 
to continue copying to his life's end. 

Outside this copying nothing appeared to exist 
for him. He did not even think of his clothes. 
His uniform, which was originally green, had 
acquired a reddish tint. The collar was so 
narrow and so tight that his neck, although of 
average length, stretched far out of it, and 
appeared extraordinarily long, just like those of 
the cats with movable heads, which are carried 
about on trays and sold to the peasants in Eussian 
villages. 

Something was always sticking to his clothes — 
a piece of thread, a fragment of straw which had 
been flying about, etc. Moreover he seemed 
to have a special predilection for passing under 
windows just when something not very clean was 
being thrown out of them, and therefore he 

constantly carried about on his hat pieces of 
orange-peel and such refuse. He never took 
any notice of what was going on in the streets, 
in contrast to his colleagues who were always 
watching people closely and whom nothing de- 
lighted more than to see someone walking along 
on the opposite pavement with a rent in his 
trousers. 

But Akaki Akakievitch saw nothing but the 
clean, regular lines of his copies before him; 
and only when he collided suddenly with a 
horse's nose, which blew its breath noisily in his 
face, did the good man observe that he was not 
sitting at his writing-table among his neat dupli- 
cates, but walking in the middle of the street. 

When he arrived home, he sat down at once 
to supper, ate his cabbage-soup hurriedly, and 
then, without taking any notice how it tasted, a 
slice of beef with garlic, together with the flies 
and any other trifles which happened to be 
lying on it. As soon as his hunger was satis- 
fied, he set himself to write, and began to copy 
the documents which he had brought home with 
him. If he happened to have no official docu- 
ments to copy, he copied for his own satisfaction 
political letters, not for their more or less grand 
style but because they were directed to some 
high personage. 

When the grey St Petersburg sky is darkened 
by the veil of night, and the whole of officialdom 



has finished its dinner according to its gastro- 
nomical inclinations or the depth of its purse — 
when all recover themselves from the perpetual 
scratching of bureaucratic pens, and all the cares 
and business with which men so often needlessly 
burden themselves, they devote the evening to 
recreation. One goes to the theatre; another 
roams about the streets, inspecting toilettes; 
another whispers flattering words to some young 
girl who has risen like a star in his modest official 
circle. Here and there one visits a colleague in 
his third or fourth story flat, consisting of two 
rooms with an entrance-hall and kitchen, fitted 
with some pretentious articles of furniture pur- 
chased by many abstinences. 

In short, at this time every official betakes him- 
self to some form of recreation — playing whist, 
drinking tea, and eating cheap pastry or smok- 
ing tobacco in long pipes. Some relate scandals 
about great people, for in whatever situation of 
life the Eussian may be, he always likes to hear 
about the aristocracy; others recount well-worn 
but popular anecdotes, as for example that of the 
commandant to whom it was reported that a 
rogue had cut off the horse's tail on the monu- 
ment of Peter the Great. 

But even at this time of rest and recreation, 
Akaki Akakievitch remained faithful to his habits. 
No one could say that he had ever seen him in 
any evening social circle. After he had written 



as much as he wanted, he went to bed, and 
thought of the joys of the coming day, and the 
fine copies which God would give him to do. 

So flowed on the peaceful existence of a man 
who was quite content with his post and his in- 
come of four hundred roubles a year. He might 
perhaps have reached an extreme old age if one 
of those unfortunate events had not befallen him, 
which not only happen to titular but to actual 
privy, court, and other councillors, and also to 
persons who never give advice nor receive it. 

In St Petersburg all those who draw a salary 
of four hundred roubles or thereabouts have a 
terrible enemy in our northern cold, although 
some assert that it is very good for the health. 
About nine o'clock in the morning, when the 
clerks of the various departments betake them- 
selves to their offices, the cold nips their noses 
so vigorously that most of them are quite bewil- 
dered. If at this time even high officials so 
suffer from the severity of the cold in their own 
persons that the tears come into their eyes, what 
must be the sufferings of the titular councillors, 
whose means do not allow of their protecting 
themselves against the rigour of winter? When 
they have put on their light cloaks, they must 
hurry through five or six streets as rapidly as 
possible, and then in the porter's lodge warm 
themselves and wait till their frozen official 
faculties have thawed. 


For some time Akaki had been feeling on his 
back and shoulders very sharp twinges of pain, 
although he ran as fast as possible from his 
dwelling to the office. After well considering the 
matter, he came to the conclusion that these 
were due to the imperfections of his cloak'. In his 
room he examined it carefully, and discovered 
that in two or three places it had become so thin 
as to be quite transparent, and that the lining 
was much torn. 

This cloak had been for a long time the stand- 
ing object of jests on the part of Akaki' s merci- 
less colleagues. They had even robbed it of the 
noble name of "cloak," and called it a cowl. 
It certainly presented a remarkable appearance. 
Every year the collar had grown smaller, for 
every year the poor titular councillor had taken 
a piece of it away in order to repair some other 
part of the cloak ; and these repairs did not look 
as if they had been done by the skilled hand 
of a tailor. They had been executed in a very 
clumsy way and looked remarkably ugly. 

After Akaki Akakievitch had ended his 
melancholy examination, he said to himself that 
he must certainly take his cloak to Petrovitch the 
tailor, who lived high up in a dark den on the 
fourth floor. 

With his squinting eyes and pock-marked face, 
Petrovitch certainly did not look as if he had the 
honour to make frock-coats and trousers for 


high officials — that is to say, when he was sober, 
and not absorbed in more pleasant diversions. 
I might dispense here with dwelling on this 
tailor; but since it is the custom to portray the 
physiognomy of every separate personage in a 
tale, I must give a better or worse description 
of Petrovitch. Formerly when he was a simple 
serf in his master's house, he was merely called 
Gregor. When he became free, he thought he 
ought to adorn himself with a new name, and 
dubbed himself Petrovitch; at the same time he 
began to drink lustily, not only on the high festi- 
vals but on all those which are marked with a 
cross in the calendar. By thus solemnly cele- 
brating the days consecrated by the Church, he 
considered that he was remaining faithful to the 
traditions of his childhood; and when he quar- 
relled with his wife, he shouted that she was an 
earthly minded creature and a German. Of this 
lady we have nothing more to relate than that she 
was the wife of Petrovitch, and that she did not 
wear a kerchief but a cap on her head. For the 
rest, she was not pretty ; only the soldiers looked 
at her as they passed, then they twirled their 
moustaches and walked on, laughing. 
Akaki Akakievitch accordingly betook himself 
to the tailor's attic. He reached it by a dark, 
dirty, damp staircase, from which, as in all the 
inhabited houses of the poorer class in St Peters- 
burg, exhaled an effluvia of spirits vexatious to 
nose and eyes alike. As the titular councillor 
climbed these slippery stairs, he calculated what 
sum Petrovitch could reasonably ask for repair- 
ing his cloak, and determined only to give him 
a rouble. 
